---
title: All Writing is Reductionistic
description: You can't trace a fractal with a finite pen.
draft: true
---

In 1687, Isaac Newton published _Philosophi√¶ Naturalis Principia Mathematica_,
in which he laid out groundbreaking new ideas about the physics of movement. The
_Principia_ was so thorough and rigorous that it has been described as "the
ultimate exemplar of science generally."^[G. E. Smith, "Newton's Philosophiae
Naturalis Principia Mathematica", The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy
(Winter 2008 Edition), E. N. Zalta (ed.).] It expounds laws of motion and
physics that are universally
applicable.^[["Isaac Newton - Wikipedia"](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Isaac_Newton)]

...except for in situations where objects are traveling at speeds close to the
speed of light. This is what Eintstein posited with his famous Theory of Special
Relativity, which he first described in 1905.

Was Newton _wrong_? No. But his writing was reductionistic. It didn't capture
the special scenarios later discussed by Einstein. It reduced a complex reality
to a usefully simpler set of concepts that was easier to comprehend. Newton
didn't know this, of course---no one knew about special relativity at that
point. Newton wrote about what he _did_ know, and the result was increased
understanding and scientific progress, notwithstanding it being reductionistic.

When you think about it, _all_ writing is reductionistic. Writing is our human
attempt to capture what is probably an infinitely complex reality in finitely
complex words. Thus, our writing is necessarily incomplete, lacking detail.

It's kind of like tracing a fractal---a mathematical shape with infinite
detail---with a finite pen. It can't be done. That's not to say that you can't
achieve a meaningful or useful approximation of the fractal, though. It's the
same with writing.

## Therefore, what?

In my mind, there are two main applications of this idea.

First, it can help us avoid perfectionism in our own writing. It has been said
that writing, like art, is not so much finished as it is abandoned. We can take
comfort in knowing that our writing _can't_ be finished, in a sense. It will
always be missing some level of detail or nuance, which will hopefully be
contributed by others as they build on what we share.

Second, we can benefit from viewing others' writing through this lens. This can
help us both to withhold criticism and extend grace to writers whose writing
seems imperfect, and to maintain healthy skepticism of those whose writing we
accept or agree with. In both cases, they're probably missing something that
some future writer will contribute. We can be open both to the thoughts of the
first writer and to the second.^[An interesting application of this principle in
a Christian context: both the Old Testament and the New Testament are valuable
scripture. And as a member of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints,
the Bible, the Book of Mormon, the other standard works, and the teachings of
modern prophets are likewise all valuable.]

But perhaps, in saying all this, I'm just being reductionistic myself.
